i. introduction
  • Broadly speaking, however, the primary argument against theories of flexible word classes is that they ignore a great deal of item-specific knowledge that speakers have about words and their uses in different functions {{Evans & Osada 2005: Sec. 3.2; Beck 2013: 216}}. For starters, when a lexical item expands into new discourse functions, there is a semantic shift in the direction of the meaning typically associated with the new context {{Croft 1991: 74-77; Croft 2001: 73}}. For example, when a property word is used in a referring construction, its meaning shifts to a person or thing with that property, not a reference to the abstract property itself. These semantic shifts cannot be attributed to some broader pragmatic principles---they are a matter of linguistic convention, and require broader uptake in a community of speakers in order to be conventionalized (as illustrated with the English word friend above). Because the meaning that results from this semantic shift is conventional, often idiosyncratic, and language-specific, flexible words cannot be truly productive, as is implied by the term "flexible". There is always a conventionalized component to their meanings.
ii. examples
  • Examples of idiosyncratic and unproductive shifts in meaning for flexible words abound in the literature. Consider again the examples from Mundari in {{ex:1.3}}, repeated here. As a predicate, the stem buru means 'heap up', but this meaning is not predictable from just the combination of the nominal sense 'mountain' and its predicative use. The word could have just as easily meant 'climb a mountain', or 'overcome', or simply 'be a mountain'. No general pragmatic principles could have predicted this meaning. Likewise consider the Central Alaskan Yup'ik examples from {{ex:1.7c}}. Why does the combination of iqeq- 'corner of mouth' + -mik 'thing held in one's mouth'; 'to put in one's mouth' result in iqmik 'chewing tobacco'? Why not 'oral thermometer' or 'toothpick'? Mithun provides many more such unpredictable examples, shown in {{XX}}.
    ® Mundari examples from ex:1.3
    ® Yup'ik examples from Mithun (2017: 165, ex. 45)
  • Conventionalizations of lexical items used in new discourse functions also vary across languages. While Croft's principle of semantic shift still broadly holds, the specific meanings of these conventionalizations are unpredictable. Croft exemplifies this point by comparing English school with Tongan ako 'school / study':
    ® "English school used predicatively does not mean the same thing as Tongan ako used predicatively, namely 'study'. Going in the opposite direction, English study used referentially does not mean the same thing as Tongan ako used referentially, namely 'school'. Finally, English small used referentially does not mean the same thing as Tongan si'i 'childhood' used referentially." (Croft 2000: 71).
  • In many cases, there is also clear evidence of lexicalization, showing that speakers are no longer aware of the relationship between different discourses uses of the same form.
iii. gaps
  1) Just as unpredictable is which sense of a word will be coopted into the new discourse function. In Wolof, for example, the nominal use of the word ndaw can only mean 'young', whereas the verb may also mean 'be little/small' (Kihm 2017: 91). Or consider the example from Cayuga in {{XX}}, repeated here as {{XX}}: of all the possible nominal meanings that could reasonably derive from 'it hauls logs'---cart, tractor, ox---the fact that its nominal use means 'horse' is a fact specific to Cayuga that must merely be memorized by speakers.
  2) "Speakers simply know whether a given root functions as a noun and what its meaning is, and whether it functions as a verb and what its meaning is. Gaps are not predictable[.]" (Mithun 2017: 163)
iv. counterargument
  1) Pointing out that functional expansion involves both semantic shifts and functional gaps is generally intended to show that lexemes cannot be truly flexible in the sense of being precategorial (see section XX) or multifunctional (see section XX), and that uses of the same lexical item for different discourse functions should therefore be considered cases of conversion, that is, homonymy / heterosemy. There are however two major problems with this argument.
  2) The first is that it creates a false dichotomy between homonymy and polysemy, when in fact the two phenomenon are opposite endpoints on a continuum. Debates over the lexical unity of a word---that is, whether two uses of a lexical item are homonymous or polysemous---arise from an Aristotelian desire to neatly sort those uses into distinct lexemes, when in fact reality is much more complex. If this problem sounds familiar, it is because it is exactly the same methodological problem that arises when trying to exclusively categorize words into different classes. The complex adaptive nature of language makes categorical classification at either level impossible.
  3) As discussed in Section {{XX}}, we know from cognitive research that mental categories are prototypal, and that the meanings of words display a polycentric, family resemblance structure. Two senses of a word are often related only extremely tenuously through a network of intervening semantic connections. Over time, the meanings of a word can diverge so drastically that speakers no longer have a direct cognitive association between them. Mithun exemplifies this nicely for both Cayuga and English:
    One. "If asked the meaning of kaotanehkwih, Cayuga speakers normally respond 'horse'. Though it has the morphological structure of a verb, it has been lexicalised as a nominal. The literal meanings of many verbal nominals are still accessible to speakers, but the origins of others have faded, and speakers express surprise at discovering them. Similarly, when asked "What would you like for breakfast?", most English speakers do not think about breaking their night-time fast, though they can usually be made aware of the literal meaning of breakfast." Mithun {{2000: 413}}
  4) Lexicalization is thus a process and a continuum. Words can be lexicalized in new discourse functions to varying degrees. The first use of a lexical item in a new discourse function is innovative; each subsequent use then contributes further to its conventionalization.
  5) Pointing out that functional expansion often creates idiosyncratic and unpredictable meanings essentially amounts to saying that senses of words can be highly divergent. This point is not in itself an argument against flexible analyses. Flexible words themselves may sit anywhere on the continuum from having closely connected, productive and predictable meanings, to having extremely divergent, idiosyncratic and unpredictable meanings. This is not a special fact about flexible words; it is simply true of words generally.
  6) Croft {{2001?}} expresses concern that ignoring semantic shifts in the analysis of flexible words overlooks important insights about how such semantic shifts are patterned (the fact that semantic shifts are always in the direction of the word's new discourse function). Given that so many researchers have indeed ignored semantic shift when arguing for flexible analyses, Croft's concern is warranted. However, it is entirely possible to define lexical flexibility in a way that both allows for the meaning of a lexical item to encompass multiple discourse functions and acknowledges that such multifunctional uses of the word involve patterned semantic shifts. The way to do this is to ground our definition of lexical flexibility in the pragmatic functions of reference, predication, and modification rather than language-specific categories like Noun, Verb, and Adjective. I offer such a definition in Section {{XX}}.
  7) The second significant problem with using semantic shifts as an argument against the existence of flexible lexemes is that it proves too much. If semantic shift is taken as evidence against the lexical unity of putatively flexible words, then it must also be taken as evidence against the lexical unity of non-flexible words. Put simply, semantic shift is an analytical problem for all words, not just flexible ones.
  8) This becomes clear when we ask, "What counts as a semantic shift? Just how "large" of a change in meaning (if it were even possible to quantify such a thing) does a semantic shift require?" To illustrate this problem, consider the semantic contribution of plural marking crosslinguistically. In the canonical case, plural marking is considered inflectional rather than derivational {{Corbett, Number}}, meaning that it does not create a new lexeme. Instead, it modifies the meaning of the existing lexeme slightly, in line with the classic distinction between inflection vs. derivation {{cite Oxford handbooks of inflection and derivational morphology}}. However, there are numerous cases of words in English with more or less drastic differences in meaning between the singular and plural, and/or senses that are only available in one of the two numbers. Consider the examples in {{XX}}.
  9) examples
    Air – atmosphere
    Airs – affected manners

    Arm - upper limb, or anything resembling a limb
    Arms - a weapon, especially a firearm

    Blind – unable to see because of injury, disease, or a congenital condition.
    Blinds – a screen for a window, especially one on a roller or made of slats.

    Character– the mental and moral qualities distinctive to an individual.
    Characters- People in a novel, play, or film

    Custom – a traditional and widely accepted way of behaving or doing something that is specific to a particular society, place, or time.
    Customs - the official department that administers and collects the duties levied by a government on imported goods.

    Content – Someone who is in a state of peaceful happiness.
    Contents – the things that are held or included in something.

    Good -having the required qualities; of a high standard.
    Goods – merchandise or possessions.

    Force – strength or energy as an attribute of physical action or movement.
    Forces – an organized military force equipped for fighting on land, sea or air.

    Spectacle – a visually striking performance or display OR Some visual scene.
    Spectacles – a pair of glasses.

    Wood – the hard fibrous material that forms the main substance of the trunk or branches of a tree or shrub, used for fuel or timber
    Woods -an area of land, smaller than a forest, that is covered with growing trees.

    Manner – a way or method in which a thing is done or happens.
    Manners – polite or well-bred social behavior OR etiquette one follows.
  10) Semantic shifts for plural marking in English are not limited to just a handful of specific lexical items either. Generic uses of the plural as in the expression foxes are cunning create a semantic shift from a concrete entity (a/the fox) to a generic one, unperceivable one---a use which strays rather far from the prototypical function of nouns as concrete perceptible entity (Hopper & Thompson 1984: 708).
  11) As with flexible words, the semantic shifts that occur with plural marking can become so substantial that speakers no longer cognize the morphological singular and plural as members of the same word. Such is the case with brother vs. brethren in English. brethren became so strongly conventionalized with its religious meaning in the plural that it was independently lexicalized as a plurale tantum, and that plural then underwent renewal with the emergence of the form brothers. This is exactly the kind of lexicalization process that occurred for many morphological verbs in Cayuga and many other North American languages.
  12) A similar example comes from Chitimacha, which has a pluractional marker -ma indicating verbal number (plural agents, plural patients, or repeated action, depending on the use). In some cases the use of -ma is purely compositional, so that it can be considered merely an inflectional marker of verbal number. In other cases -ma so significantly alters the meaning of the word that it must be considered derivational. Compare the uses of -ma with the verbs in {{XX}} through {{XX}} (note that {{XX}} and {{XX}} are phrasal verbs).
    a) kow- 'call' vs. kooma- 'call multiple people'
    b) qapx cuw- 'come back; go about' vs. qapx cuuma- 'travel; wander'
    c) qapx qiy- 'turn together; mix, join' vs. qapx qiima- 'give a prayer, benediction; perform magic'
    d) {{cite Swadesh's dictionary}}
  13) In (a), the use of -ma is entirely compositional. The presence of -ma indicates that the verb has a plural patient argument. In (b), the use of -ma is arguably still compositional, though perhaps somewhat lexicalized given the high frequency with which the word appears in the text. 'travel, wander' could reasonably be interpreted as a continued repetition of 'go about'. In (c), however, qapx qiima- has become lexicalized with a new meaning not directly related to that of qapx qiy-. The diachronic connection between the two meanings is that prayers and magical incantations were traditionally accompanied by circling gestures with the arms. qapx qiima- originally mean 'turn/circle around repeatedly', but over time lexicalized with its new religious meaning, 'give a prayer, benediction'. This lexicalization process parallels that of brethren in English.
  14) Finally, there are many languages which do not typically mark plurality on nouns {{Dryer 2013, WALS Ch. 33}}, and yet have senses available for semantically plural uses of the word but not singular uses (where the semantic number can be understood from the clausal context, usually through verbal agreement marking). For example the word soq in Chitimacha may mean foot or paw in a singular context and feet or paws in a plural context, but may also mean tracks (e.g. animal tracks) in a plural context---a fairly significant and idiosyncratic shift in meaning, and one that is both language- and item-specific and thus conventional. This use constitutes a morphologically unmarked semantic shift in the meaning of the word, just as idiosyncratic meanings of words in cases of functional expansion also constitute morphologically unmarked semantic shifts. If we take such unmarked semantic shifts as evidence against lexical unity, then we must say that the 'foot' and 'tracks' meanings of soq constitute two distinct lexemes as well.
  15) One might ask, if we start splitting up lexemes based on every degree of semantic shift, where does the splitting stop? This is exactly analogous to the problem of lumping vs. splitting in the context of lexical categories. The Radical Construction Grammar solution to this problem is to abandon the commitment to larger groupings of items (the major lexical categories), and acknowledge that languages consist of an interconnected network of smaller items (constructions) instead. This approach has the major advantage of sidestepping unproductive debates about the existence or unity of particular lexical categories in particular languages, and shifts the focus instead to better understanding the relationships and patterns among the individual constructions. This is precisely what I propose to do for lexemes as well. If we abandon the idea that all the meanings associated with a form must be in some way grouped based on their morphosyntactic contexts of occurrence, we sidestep unproductive debates regarding homonymy vs. polysemy, and can focus instead on the relationships and patterns among the various senses associated with a given form---specifically, the nature of the semantic shifts that occur between uses of the word in different discourse functions.
In sum, idiosyncratic semantic shifts are not the problem for theories of lexical flexibility that they are often taken to be. Indeed, functional expansion wouldn't even be possible if hearers weren't capable of determining the meaning of a form when used in even highly unusual contexts. Innovative uses of words in new functions would be all but impossible, providing no opportunity for such innovations to receive broader adoption in a linguistic community. Each time a speaker encounters a novel use of a lexical item for the first time, they must accomplish the difficult task of discerning its meaning. This is no less true when the meaning of the word in that new context is highly unpredictable and idiosyncratic. In a certain sense, every use of a word is an instance of functional expansion, because every use of a word is always in a slightly different discourse and social context than the one before. Words are socially contextualized entities, and that social context can change completely from one utterance to the next. Every token of a word thus necessarily appears in a new pragmatic context, and that pragmatic context slightly shapes its meaning. Language use is language change. Semantic shift is therefore an integral and ubiquitous part of language use; the question is simply the degree of that semantic shift.
